PEP 825: Add intution for variant ordering (#85)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-0825.rst

feature within the namespace, then by value within the feature. Only
properties compatible with the target system take part. The ranking for
namespaces comes from the package's variant metadata. The ranking itself
for their features and feature values will be defined in a subsequent PEP.

To compare two wheels by variant preference, compare their best ranked
variant property triple. The intuition is that this selects the wheel that
makes the best use of the target hardware. If both have the same best variant
property, use the next lower ranked property as a tiebreaker, repeatedly
until an order is established. By comparing all compatible wheels, this
yields most prefered wheel.

To express it with Python types instead: Each variant wheel has a set of
3-tuples, its variant properties. Take the wheels compatible with the
system and filter their property sets to those compatible with the system.
Then, sort each wheel's set into an (ordered) list, more prefered properties
sorted higher. Now you can the sort the wheels by comparing their lists. The
wheel sorted to the top is the most prefered wheel.

As an example, take a GPU wheel with ``cuda`` properties and an

> optimized CPU wheel with ``x86_64`` properties, where the package ranks

Author: I'm avoiding naming a specific company here.

With wheel variants, there can be several compatible wheels per project
version. We define a total ordering to give package authors and users
control over wheel preference and to ensure that all tools select the
same variant without ambiguity. Tools may allow users to override this
ordering.

Every variant property is a ``namespace :: feature :: value`` triple
whose components are ranked in that order: by namespace first, then by
feature within the namespace, then by value within the feature. Only
properties compatible with the target system take part. The ranking for
namespaces comes from the package's variant metadata. The ranking for their
features and the ranking of values within features will be defined in a
subsequent PEP.

To compare two wheels by variant preference, compare their best-ranked
variant property triple. The intuition is that this selects the wheel that
makes the best use of the target hardware. If both have the same best variant
property, use the next lower-ranked property as a tiebreaker, repeatedly

> until an order is established. All else being equal, the wheel with more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
until an ordering is established. All else being equal, the wheel with more
```

Not 100% sure but "an order" suggests to me the wrong meaning here. Perhaps "ordering" would be safer.

properties wins. By comparing all compatible wheels, this yields most
preferred wheel. This is similar to list and tuple ordering in Python, which
starts by comparing the first element, then the second, and so forth until

> either one element is unequal or one list has no more elements.

Author: As our audience is Python programmers, they already have an intuition for how list/tuple ordering works in Python, so we can give them an intuition by saying it's the same.

> either one element is unequal or one list has no more elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
either one element is unequal or one of the lists has no more elements.
```

Author: Found an even simpler version

To express it with Python types instead: Each variant wheel has a set of
3-tuples, its variant properties. Take the compatible wheels and filter

> their property sets to those compatible with the system. Sort the remaining

Reviewer: One thing that's missing here is that we're only taking the highest ranking value for each feature. Maybe it's fine if only the algorithm lists that, but it's a bit at odds with how detailed we explain this here.

Author: Good catch, added.

set entries into an (ordered) list, more preferred properties sorted higher.
Now you can the sort the wheels by comparing their lists with Python list
order semantics, except for using a sort key that use variant property
ordering over lexicographic ordering for the tuples inside the list. The

> wheel sorted to the top is the most preferred wheel.

Author: The alternative is saying wrap the 3-tuple in type that overrides rich comparisons to variant preference and then use regular `list.sort()` without a `key=`

With wheel variants, there can be several compatible wheels per project
version. We define a total ordering to give package authors and users
control over wheel preference and to ensure that all tools select the
same variant without ambiguity. Tools may allow users to override this
ordering.

Every variant property is a ``namespace :: feature :: value`` triple
whose components are ranked in that order: by namespace first, then by
feature within the namespace, then by value within the feature. Only
properties compatible with the target system take part, and only the best

> value within each feature. The ranking for namespaces comes from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
properties compatible with the target system take part, and only the highest
ranking compatible value for each feature. The ranking for namespaces comes from the
```

Maybe? I'd like to avoid ambiguity if the "best" value is not compatible.

Author: I tried to use simpler words in this section, but that works too.
